Final Report

**Problem & Related Work**

There are countless factors in an individual’s life that can have negative
effects on their happiness, especially in a world where everyone is connected
through social media, news outlets, etc. Data from the General Social Survey has
found that from 1990 to 2018, there has been a 50% increase in the number of
unhappy people in the United States. Another study found that the overall
satisfaction in American’s lives has also fallen by 6% between 2007 and 2018.
Due to the pervasiveness of negativity, evidenced by these statistics, it would
be incredibly impactful to find a way to increase happiness on an individual
level.

There are plenty of apps that are designed to boost someone's happiness, and
each takes a unique approach. The app Happify has the user take a quick survey,
and then based on their answers, it determines the user’s base happiness levels.
Then it gives a series of games, puzzles, and causes the user to focus on happy
thoughts, all while tracking overall happiness. Research from Southern
California Conference for undergraduate research mentioned how journaling
improves the overall mood of the individual who participates, and the time or
energy spent journalling does not affect the result. Tech companies have also
started to use meditation apps for their own employees, and it has been shifted
to the masses. One famous app, called calm, is even given to Northwestern
Students, as a way to decrease stress and improve overall happiness in students.
Computing has its limits, however, especially when it comes to something as
unpredictable as moods and happiness. A computer cannot constantly track mood;
though it can keep track of cycles, it cannot understand when a random event
happens to change an individual’s mood. Because a person’s daily mood can be
based off of events that happen in real time, it is often hard to rely on
patterns to understand mood.

One potential app idea that would solve this problem is a mood social media
platform. Some possible features that this app could have are tracking your
daily happiness level, reminders about things that made your day in the past,
notifications to friends when you’re feeling down and need some support, and
providing small mood-boosting events throughout the day such as playing your
favorite song, telling a joke, or showing you a funny video. By performing user
interviews and testing, our group plans to narrow down the scope of our project
in order to provide users with a product that will meet their needs.

**User Research**

Our target user population in testing is college students. This is because
college students are the most likely to not only be affected by our app in some
way, but also to be able to use our app as intended. We expect that the users’
computer experience will be relatively proficient, and that they will be able to
quickly learn how to use apps. They also are a young population, meaning that
they will be more receptive to trying a different approach to happiness, opposed
to an older population who might feel they have a sense of what makes them happy
already. Lastly, college students seem to share a lot of similar experiences and
stresses in their life, and therefore similar causes of unhappiness. Because of
their shared experiences, we can design an app that specifically targets the
common stresses that college students go through, and therefore design a
solution that will hopefully have a significant impact. From user research, we
wanted to learn the similarities and differences in the way college students
cope with unhappiness in order to understand what in the app can be generalized
to college students and what we could personalize.

Our research approach involved both an interview and a contextual inquiry
component so that we could gain a better understanding of what causes general
everyday sadness, strategies people employ to help themselves as well as others,
and how different stimuli affect people’s moods and attitudes. For the interview
portion, we asked questions such as “What would you do if your friend was upset”
and “What causes you to be unhappy or upset and how do you handle it?”. For the
contextual inquiry part, we had people write down 5 good things that happened to
them that day and then asked if and how the activity affected their mood.
Additionally, we asked people to then look at images of things they enjoyed and
noted how and if looking at such stimuli affected them.

From this user research, we then compiled various personas we envisioned using
our design and a list of features we planned to include in our design. The
people using our design would be college students whose stress may be a result
from either accidemics or personal relationships. Many of these personas found
help in friends and loved ones to console. However, it seemed as though these
people were hesitant to reach out even when others do help them, as they would
feel like a burden. Not every persona we developed dealt with these situations
in the exact same way, though; while some people felt like isolation made them
feel worse, others felt like isolation helped them collect their thoughts.
Because of the similarities and differences between personas, we knew there
needed to be some features that could be generalized to all users and some that
must be personalized. These features include:

*Essential Features*

-   A feature that allows people to connect with others in order to promote a
    support network that many find helps them cope with stress and unhappiness.

-   A reminder system to keep users from reverting to unhealthy habits, such as
    taking their frustrations out on others.

-   Offer information about healthy coping mechanisms and make suggestions of
    next steps to take to help improve mental health.

*Nice-To-Have Features*

-   A way to allow users to reflect on their progress and state of happiness and
    track their feelings and mental health over time.

-   Allow for personalization of the appearance of the app, such as theme,
    colors, etc.

-   A way to personalize the app to show content that is based on each user’s
    individual sources of happiness.

-   Rewards for improvement in happiness and practicing better behavior.

**Paper Prototyping**

We created a paper prototype of our website with the features we planned to
include from user interviews (Figures 1-8). We gave each tested three tasks:
send a message to a friend, check on your progress, and fill out a daily
reflection entry. All of the people we tested our prototype on found the website
to be generally intuitive to navigate and the tasks easy to complete given the
layout of the prototype. The main issue that arose from paper prototype testing
was that people would often go to the menu and then click on “My Week” to check
their progress, as opposed to “My Progress”. This was because in the menu tab,
“My Week” came first and so the user didn’t bother to look further because they
assumed that progress would be included in the “My Week” page.

From this testing, we learned that we needed to relabel some of the page names
to better describe what the user was supposed to do on each page. Additionally,
we learned that the users sometimes didn’t end up reading or noticing everything
on the screen when they were focused on completing a specific task, especially
if it was in a list form. Because of this, we decided to reformat our menu page
so that this would no longer be as much of an issue.

![](media/011ab9c61b125054a4dbc23154aa4210.png)

![](media/4ca9ac2ad0e1f0905befc8c06298bac2.png)

![](media/4cfc9b3d6f53b519d17a62fe2c734201.png)

![](media/bb397fdfaf0aa29dea14d2cf8d980ef7.png)

![](media/b027b359c06ac310a332b6cbeb7455c0.png)

![](media/f55eeab41f709edf580ed4b94411ec64.png)

![](media/cd9d9b7f9ed73ac4761db766b196cb5e.png)

![](media/16ebdd619344cb96a8c0024de075073f.png)

![](media/6d1471b45c6557d863ca062c4be8e951.png)

Figures 1-8: Paper Prototype

**High-Fidelity Prototyping**

*Component/Task 1:*

We chose the Data Visualization component, which showed three different graphs
on our My Progress page. The three graphs are only shown when a button is
selected for week, month, or year.

The task we have decided to implement for this component involved the My
Progress task page (Figure 9). We wanted a possible user to view their happiness
progression in three different graphs: day, month, and year. By clicking one of
the three buttons on the site (week, month, or year), the user is able to toggle
through the three different data visualizations.

![](media/c155f18a31ad702b5100097481255471.png)

Figure 9: My Progress Page

*Component/Task 2:*

The second component we chose to implement was the Data Collection component. We
created a form that had 3 areas where the user is able to enter text, an area
where a sliding scale is used, a file component ,and a submit button (Figure
10). Our form supports data validation by implementing the file and slider
components. Both elements restrict the user to their specific types of outputs.

The task we chose to implement was for the data collection component involved
the user to write about any highlights they might’ve had throughout the day.
This would be done by going to the My Day tab linked through the My Week page on
the menu, filling out a form, and then clicking submit.

![](media/f800d48b8b59f800a35848b058e12c42.png)

Figure 10: My Day Form

*Component/Task 3:*  
For our third component we implemented Social Interactions. The user can go to
their page of friends, and directly message them, and receive a response (Figure
11). The user can immediately see their message that was sent, and it holds them
in chronological order, with the top being the first message, and the last one
sent is on the bottom. It is designed so the user can chat with any friends they
have on their friends list. It is not anonymous as the user must be able to see
which friend they are talking to directly.

For the social interactions component, we decided to implement the chat task.
Our task is to have users communicate with each other through a private chat,
thus helping to create a support network for users.

![](media/2da2c05dd7d17daabf64e6e16afc0e88.png)

Figure 11: Chat Page

*Component/Task 4:*  
For this round of testing, we decided to implement the external data integration
component. Our task is to have users navigate to the explore page, search
content that makes them happy, and then look at various photos and videos that
result (Figure 11).  
Our task for this round of user testing was to implement a way for users to view
media, such as videos or photos, that make them happy. This component was placed
under the “explore” page of our website.

By adding Youtube videos, our users can see types of videos they believe can
increase their mode. This is very important, as apps and websites trying to help
their users overall mood have an increase of users that are currently not having
their best day. Without providing a way for users to increase it, or at least
distracting themselves, the app would not work as intended. With the Youtube
videos, users can distract themselves before and after writing about why their
day was poor. For the user utilizing the app every day to check their progress,
if they are happy that day, they can use the videos to keep the joy rolling.

Adding images also has the same effect as the Youtube videos. We would like to
have users be able to have something that they may laugh at when they cannot
view a video or are not in the mood. By adding two types of media that are
supposed to serve the same purpose, we have increased their likelihood of being
utilized. With them also in an app created to increase overall happiness, we
also have also eliminated the need to switch to another app to view videos for
that exact purpose, creating a wider range of options for the user.

![](media/72ff6724392e13196a19dd8524906a62.png)

![](media/f424aa73095a111adfdfa965e5382698.png)

Figure 11: Explore Page

**Reflection**

With the time that we had, we were able to create the site “Happy Appy”, a
website that helps users become happier by allowing them to log daily
reflections that focus on the good in their lives, track their progress over
time, connect with friends to create a supportive social network, find outside
resources to educate them on healthy coping or find professional help, and a
place to see positive content that can help them feel better. With each step of
the process of making our website, from determining the features to be included
up until the final design of the website, we followed the feedback we got to
better our design with each iteration. This included having to rename pages so
that users better understood the purpose and actions of each page, changing the
overall layout of a page to make it more navigable, and changing the entire
color scheme so the site seemed more uniform and was easier to read. From the
overall layout of flow of pages, to the aesthetic aspects, we tried to best
cater to the feedback we received to better the overall user experience and
usability of the site.

If we had more time to work on this project, our next steps would be towards
writing the more backend aspects of the site. This would include being able to
save the inputted information from the “My Day” form to allow users to view
previous submissions as well as create graphs for the “My Progress” page that
generates from the slider input from each form submission. Additionally, we
would work to improve the aesthetic details on the site, such as the different
animations and the coloring of each element, to improve the overall design,
usability, and cohesive look of the site. Hopefully making such changes would
help users to better navigate the website, improve the overall experience of
using the site, and encourage users to keep using it.

**Links**

Github Repository:
<https://github.com/Happy-Appy-An-App-For-Happiness/Happy-Appy/tree/project_8>

README:
<https://github.com/Happy-Appy-An-App-For-Happiness/Happy-Appy/blob/project_8/README.md>

Prototype: <https://happy-appy-an-app-for-happiness.github.io/Happy-Appy/>

Instructions: Our prototype is best viewed on either Safari. Once you click the
smiley face, the menu will open up. From the menu, you can click each bubble to
get to all other pages.
